Update of grouping pass + implementation documentation (#50)
qir-alliance/qat: docs/src/DeveloperGuide/LogicSeparation.md

# QAT Application: Logic separation

## Architecture considerations

In this section, we will discuss some classical architectures and then make
considerations regarding quantum architectures.

### Motivation: Classical co-processors

Before diving into quantum architectures, we first make a brief note on
classical architectures: For decades we have seen classical architectures
composed of multiple processing units. For instance, in the nineties it was
common to have a co-processor supporting the main x86 architecture with such
tasks as floating point operations. Other co-processing architectures were built
to enhance the computers sound capabilities and in 2001, we saw graphical
processing units (GPUs) emerge. To this day, GPUs are still an essentially

> co-processor for many computing tasks including gaming, physics simulation and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
co-processor for many computing tasks including gaming, physics simulation, and
```
I'm a big fan of the Oxford comma. I'm hoping you will be too 😊.

Reviewer: Though it _does_ seem like you've consistently not used Oxford commas throughout the text, so maybe it is your stylistic choice.

Author: It is not something I have ever used, however, I am not very picky with regard to stylistic choices for written language, so I am happy to accept these changes :)

graphics to mention a few.

> While floating operations co-processors eventually became integrated into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While floating point operation co-processors eventually became integrated into the
```

                    │                     │
                  │ │                     │
Classical program │ │                     │
        execution │ │                     │
                  │ │  State preparation  │
                  ▼ │     Programming     │
                    ├─────────────────────▶
                    │                     │ │
                    │                     │ │ Quantum program
                    │                     │ │ execution
                    │   Result readout    │ │
                    ◀─────────────────────┤ ▼
                  │ │                     │
Classical program │ │                     │
        execution │ │  State preparation  │
                  │ │     Programming     │
                  ▼ ├─────────────────────▶
                    │                     │ │
                    │                     │ │ Quantum program
                    │                     │ │ execution
                    │   Result readout    │ │
                    ◀─────────────────────┤ ▼
                    │                     │
                    ▼                     ▼
                    Time
```

> TODO: Finish this section

Reviewer: Do you need to address this TODO in this PR?

Author: Fixed.

### Problem definition

The QIR specification does not put any requirements for a generic QIR to provide
a separation of instructions intended for the CPU and QPU. However, under the
assumption that quantum architectures follow the PPU-SPU pattern described in
the previous section such a separation is necessary to perform the program
execution. Our aim in this document will be to define how the separation should
be performed and what qualifies an entity to be a CPU or QPU element.

We will assume that branching is not possible within the QPU since this is a

> classical phenomena. The consequence is that CPU-QPU separation must happen at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
classical phenomenon. The consequence is that CPU-QPU separation must happen at
```

the level of `BasicBlocks` in LLVM rather than at a function or even program

> level. While it may be that some QPUs has basic branching support, we note that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
level. While it may be that some QPUs have basic branching support, we note that
```

accessed from the GPU and vice versa. The value of a given register is only
available through data transport through the two units. For CPU-QPU
architectures, this limitation is the same. While the CPU may hold a reference
to a qubit, the physical qubit itself resides on the QPU and can only be
manipulated through the CPU-QPU interface.

Quantum register types

| LLVM type name | Description                                                          |
| -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Qubit*`       | Qubit register amounting to a physical qubit or simulation data type |
| `Result*`      | Result register                                                      |

Classical register types

| LLVM type name | Description |
| -------------- | ----------- |
| `i1`           |             |
| `i2`           |             |
| `i8`           |             |
| `i16`          |             |
| `i32`          |             |
| `i64`          |             |
| `struct`       |             |

On the CPU, `Qubit*` and `Result*` are treated as integers. This means that they

> should never be dereferenced nor nor should the "memory address" be written to.

Reviewer 2: nor nor - typo?

Author: Corrected, thanks!

### Instructions and instruction classification

The QIR specification has two high-level classes of instructions: Those which
are calls to functions with names starting with `__quantum__` and all other
instructions. Function calls to functions starting with `__quantum__` are
expected to follow the QIR specification and these calls are further divided
into two groups: Intrinsic functions (`__quantum__qis__`) and runtime functions

> (`__quantum__rt__`). The latter is expected to be provided by the runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`__quantum__rt__`). The latter are expected to be provided by the runtime
```

> library given by the frontend and/or the target machine whereas the former are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
library given by the frontend and/or the target machine, whereas the former are
```

intrinsic functions. The intrinsic functions may either run on the CPU, the QPU
or serve as instruction to transfer data between the two processing units.

We classify `__quantum__qis__` functions into four categories: Purely CPU,
purely QPU, setup/transport from CPU to QPU and result/transport from QPU to

> CPU. The classification happens on the basis function signature: The function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CPU. The classification happens on the basis of the function signature: The function
```

> arguments together with the return result determines the where the call will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arguments together with the return result determine where the call will be
```

executed according to following rules:

- Any `void` function location is purely determined by its arguments:

>   - Void functions that only has quantum register types as arguments are
>     classified as pure QPU instructions
>   - Void functions that only has classical register types as arguments are
>     classified as pure CPU instructions
>   - Void functions that that takes a mixture are classified as CPU to QPU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Void functions that only have quantum register types as arguments are
    classified as pure QPU instructions
  - Void functions that only have classical register types as arguments are
    classified as pure CPU instructions
  - Void functions that takes a mixture are classified as CPU to QPU
```

  %3 = select i1 %0, %Qubit* null, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*)
  %4 = select i1 %0, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), %Qubit* null
  br label %quantum

quantum:                                          ; preds = %load
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit* %3)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__z__body(%Qubit* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %3, %Qubit* %4)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* %4, %Result* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* %4)
  br label %readout

readout:                                          ; preds = %quantum
  %5 = tail call i1 @__quantum__qis__read_result__body(%Result* null)
  br label %post-classical

post-classical:                                   ; preds = %readout
  %6 = select i1 %5, i64 -7, i64 %2
  br label %exit_quantum_grouping

exit_quantum_grouping:                            ; preds = %post-classical
  ret i64 %6
}
```

In the above program, the original instructions are rearranged into blocks
following the pattern previously discussed with an `entry` block, a `load`
block, a `quantum` program block, a `readout` block and a `post-classical`

> processing block. Visualised in as above the blocks are executed as follows:

Reviewer: Not sure what "Visualized in as above" is referring to. Maybe it should be:
```suggestion
processing block. Visualized as above, the blocks are executed as follows:
```

```text
    Classical             PPU-SPU             Quantum
 processing unit  │      interface      │ processing unit
                  │                     │
           entry│ │                     │
                ▼ │        load         │
                  ├─────────────────────▶
                  │       readout       │ │ quantum
                  ◀─────────────────────┤ ▼
 post-classical │ │                     │
                ▼ │                     │
  exit-grouping │ │                     │
                ▼ │                     │
                  ▼                     ▼
                  Time
```

> With this separation it becomes straight-forward to execute the program parts in
> accordance with the processing unit which the require as well as to ensure that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this separation, it becomes straight-forward to execute the program parts in
accordance with the required processing unit as well as to ensure that
```

proper setup of the QPU was performed before initiating the quantum calculation.

### Block Separation Strategy

Our block separation strategy follows a divide-and-conquer approach: First we
sort instructions into new blocks according to the source processing. Each of

> these blocks are then split into blocks based on the destination processing

Reviewer: Maybe a better wording would be:
```suggestion
these blocks are then sub-divided based on the destination processing
```

```text
                                 ┌──────────┐
                                 │Classical │     entry
                 ┌──────────┐ ┌─▶│   Dest   │
                 │          │ │  └──────────┘
                 │Classical │ │  ┌──────────┐
              ┌─▶│  Source  ├─┤  │ Quantum  │      load
              │  │          │ └─▶│   Dest   │
              │  └──────────┘    └──────────┘
              │                  ┌──────────┐
┌──────────┐  │  ┌──────────┐    │ Quantum  │    quantum
│          │  │  │          │ ┌─▶│   Dest   │
│ Original │  │  │ Quantum  │ │  └──────────┘
│  block   │──┼─▶│  Source  ├─┤  ┌──────────┐
│          │  │  │          │ │  │Classical │    readout
└──────────┘  │  └──────────┘ └─▶│   Dest   │
              │                  └──────────┘
              │  ┌──────────┐    ┌──────────┐
              │  │          │    │Classical │ post-classical
              │  │Classical │ ┌─▶│   Dest   │
              └─▶│  Source  │─┤  └──────────┘
                 │          │ │  ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─
                 └──────────┘ │   Empty (QD)│
                              └─▶│
                                  ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
```

> We note the second split is reversed depending type of instructions it contain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We note the second split is reversed depending type of instructions it contains.
```

That is the destination of same type as the source processing unit comes first
and the case where they are opposite follows. We also note that the second split
where we divide depending on destination is technically easier to implement than
the first since this the blocks processed already have certain guarantees

> provided:

Reviewer: These two sentences are grammatically faulty. I don't know what the intended message is for these.

Author: Updated.

1. We are guaranteed that we only need to make one split
2. We are guaranteed that the order of all dependencies is preserved when
   splitting instructions into the two blocks

> The first split is more involved as we here need to identify dependencies
> between classical and quantum circuits and may end up with a output similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first split is more involved as we need to identify dependencies
between classical and quantum circuits and may end up with an output similar to:
```

  %5 = select i1 %3, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), %Qubit* null
  %6 = select i1 %4, %Qubit* null, %Qubit* inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*)
  %7 = mul i64 %z, 9
  %8 = shl i64 %z, 1
  br label %quantum2

quantum2:                                         ; preds = %post-classical
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit* %5)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__z__body(%Qubit* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %5, %Qubit* %6)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* %6, %Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*))
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* %6)
  %9 = tail call i1 @__quantum__qis__read_result__body(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Result*))
  br label %post-classical1

post-classical1:                                  ; preds = %quantum2
  %10 = select i1 %9, i64 %8, i64 %7
  %11 = mul i64 %10, 5
  %12 = add i64 %11, -7
  br label %exit_quantum_grouping

exit_quantum_grouping:                            ; preds = %post-classical1
  ret i64 %12
}
```

which contains two quantum circuits where the second circuit depends on the
first one. That is, in the block `post-classical` we select which qubits to use

> for the execute and hence, we would not be able to run the second circuit prior

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the execute, and hence, we would not be able to run the second circuit prior
```

                                 │Classical │     entry
                 ┌──────────┐ ┌─▶│   Dest   │
                 │          │ │  └──────────┘
                 │Classical │ │  ┌──────────┐
              ┌─▶│  Source  ├─┤  │ Quantum  │      load
              │  │          │ └─▶│   Dest   │
              │  └──────────┘    └──────────┘
              │                  ┌──────────┐
┌──────────┐  │  ┌──────────┐    │ Quantum  │    quantum
│          │  │  │          │ ┌─▶│   Dest   │
│ Original │  │  │ Quantum  │ │  └──────────┘
│  block   │──┼─▶│  Source  ├─┤  ┌──────────┐
│          │  │  │          │ │  │Classical │    readout
└──────────┘  │  └──────────┘ └─▶│   Dest   │
              │                  └──────────┘
              │  ┌──────────┐    ┌──────────┐
              │  │          │    │Classical │ post-classical
              │  │Classical │ ┌─▶│   Dest   │
              └─▶│  Source  │─┤  └──────────┘
                 │          │ │  ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─
                 └──────────┘ │   Empty (QD)│
                              └─▶│
                                  ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
```

We note the second split is reversed depending type of instructions it contains.

> We order instruction blocks (during the second split) such that instructions
> where instructions where source- and destination processing unit are same comes
> first, and those where the differ second. We note that the second split is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We order instruction blocks (during the second split) such that instructions
whose source and destination processing units are the same come
first. We note that the second split is
```

technically easier to make as the blocks processed in the first split already
have certain guarantees provided:

1. We are guaranteed that we only need to make one split
2. We are guaranteed that the order of all dependencies is preserved when
   splitting instructions into the two blocks

The first split is more involved as we need to identify dependencies between
classical and quantum circuits and may end up with an output similar to:

```text
                 ┌──────────┐
                 │Classical │
              ┌─▶│  Source  │
              │  └──────────┘
              │  ┌──────────┐
              │  │ Quantum  │
              ├─▶│  Source  │
              │  └──────────┘
              │  ┌──────────┐
              │  │Classical │
              ├─▶│  Source  │
┌──────────┐  │  └──────────┘
│          │  │  ┌──────────┐
│ Original │  │  │ Quantum  │
│  block   │──┼─▶│  Source  │
│          │  │  └──────────┘

> └──────────┘  │  ┌──────────┐
>               │  │Classical │
>               ├─▶│  Source  │
>               │  └──────────┘
>               │
>               │       .
>               │       .
>               │       .
>               │
>               │  ┌──────────┐
>               │  │Classical │
>               └─▶│  Source  │
>                  └──────────┘

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
└──────────┘  │  ┌──────────┐
              │  │Classical │
              ├─▶│  Source  │
              │  └──────────┘
              │       .
              │       .
              │       .
              │  ┌──────────┐
              │  │Classical │
              └─▶│  Source  │
                 └──────────┘
```
